Create architecture documentation (#171)
codeforpdx/dwellinglybackend: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contributing
## App Architecture
This section describes how the application is structured, mainly the Python backend. This does not attempt to cover any information about the React frontend. As of this writing the app is currently under a major refactoring to make the application more robust. There is code that uses the deprecated [RequestParser](https://flask-restful.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reqparse.html) which is being removed from the application in favor of [Marshmallow](https://marshmallow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/). It is expected that all new functionality uses Marshmallow.

> This application uses the [Flask](https://palletsprojects.com/p/flask/) micro-framework backed by an [sqlLite](https://sqlite.org/index.html) database ([Postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/) for production) utilizing [SQLAlchemy](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/14/) as the ORM. [Flask-Restful](https://flask-restful.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is used for routing to encourage Restful routes/resources. [Marshmallow](https://marshmallow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) is being used for input validation, serialization, and deserialization. Flask-mail is currently being used to send mail, and Jinja is used for templating the email messages. However, the mail library has been deprecated and there is an open issue to switch to another library. Flake8 is currently installed for linting, but not really being used. However, we will most likely be using [black](https://github.com/psf/black) in the future or a combination of Flake8 for linting and black for formatting. For database migrations we recently installed alembic and will be using that in the future. For now, while the app is under development we drop the db and rebuild whenever there is a change. There are three different environments the application is setup to run in. Development, testing, and production environments. For testing we are using Pytest. It is an expectation that all new functionality, changes in behavior, or bug fixes will be covered under automated tests.

Reviewer: For now, while the app is under development,
(add a comma after development)

Change "There are three different environments the application is setup to run in. Development, testing, and production environments." to "There are three different environments the application is setup to run in: development, testing, and production environments."

Reviewer: Would be better to not repeat environments. "There are three different environments the application is setup to run in: development, testing, and production."

There are currently three main areas of the application to be familiar with, and possibly four in the future (dependent on how serialization will be handled).

The three main areas are: resources, models, and schemas. This is inline with an MVC web application. The resources directory contains all of the controllers/endpoints. Resources is the terminology that Flask-restful uses and it is the terminology used here. Models are the models, that is where the database tables are defined, and methods that are related to fetching data from the database. The Schemas are for the Marshmallow library, and they define how to validate, serialize, and deserialize the data.

A fourth potential main area is the serializers folder which will be used to build the response.

There is one more file to be familiar with and that is the `app.py` file. This is the file that is ran when the application starts. This is also where we are describing the routes for the app.

The rest of this section will describe the three main areas, and how each of those areas should be tested.

Models:

> Models define the database schema. They define what tables to create and what columns to use. They can also contain other methods that relates to the business logic of the application. All models in this application inherit from the BaseModel class, which adds created_at and udpated_at timestamps for all the tables in the database. It also contains methods that are used to find, create, update, and delete database rows. As of this writing there are some models that still have an init method. However, for most of the models the init method is not needed and will be removed. This is because Flask-restful provides an init method that works with key word arguments, and it is recommended to call super if a custom init method is needed. You can see an example of this in the User Model. Currently, all models except for the lease model have a json method that defines how to serialize that object. Models can be found in the `models` directory.

Reviewer 2: updated_at (sp?)

Testing Models:

All models should have unit tests that can be found in the `tests/unit` directory. Each model should have tests that test the inherited methods from the BaseModel to ensure that nothing crazy is inadvertently done to change the behavior of the methods that the BaseModel provides. These are easily implemented using the base_interface_test file. Finally, there should be a test for every public method that is defined in the model. This would be the json method or any other method defined in the file that is directly used outside of the Models class.

Schemas:

Marshmallow Schemas are used primarily for input validation and deserialization. And eventually serialization. Schemas receive the data that the client sends the back-end and validates that data before the data is inserted into the database. They can also describe how the data is serialized before sending data to the client. Schemas can be found in the `schemas` directory.

Testing Schemas:

> All schemas should have unit tests. Primarily validation tests. This app uses flask-marshmallow which provides an auto-schema that infers some basic validations based off of the table definition in the Models class. Any additional validations defined in the schema must be tested Schema tests can be found in the `tests/schemas` directory. Deserialization should also be tested here when used. Serialization is currently not used and does not need to be tested here at this time. It's possible that testing serialization will take place elsewhere.

Reviewer: "Any additional validations defined in the schema must be tested. Schema tests can be found in the `tests/schemas` directory."
(add a period after tested)

Resources:

A resource main job is to coordinate a response for the request. If data is provided the resource will send that data to the schema for validation and deserialization. The resource will communicate with the model to query for data or insert/update a tables row in the database. Finally the resource will send a response back to the client. Resources can be found in the `resources` directory.

Testing Resources:

> Each resource will usually have one test for each action (GET, POST, DELETE, etc...). When the Models and Schemas have unit tests, and when the resource uses the models and schemas appropriately. Then **generally** only a successful reponse (The Happy Path) needs to be tested. As all other responses that can occurr happen elsewhere and are already under test. Such as validation errors, or a database row cannot be found. Errors such as these need not be tested as they're already built into the architecture of the app and happen automatically as long as the schemas are used along with the appropriate methods defined in the BaseModel. Tests for the resources can be found in the `tests/integration` directory.

Reviewer 2: occur/occurr (sp?)

Reviewer: "A resource's main job is to coordinate a response for the request." (add 's to resource)

"When the Models and Schemas have unit tests, and when the resource uses the models and schemas appropriately, then **generally** only a successful response (The Happy Path) needs to be tested." (combine the two sentences and fix 'reponse' spelling)

# Contributing
## App Architecture

> This section describes how the application is structured, mainly the Python backend. This does not attempt to cover any information about the React frontend. As of this writing, the app is currently under a major refactoring to make the application more robust. There is code that uses the deprecated [RequestParser](https://flask-restful.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reqparse.html) which is being removed from the application in favor of [Marshmallow](https://marshmallow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/). It is expected that all new functionality uses Marshmallow.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section describes the structure of the Python backed for the Dwellingly application. This does not cover the React frontend. The app is currently under a major refactoring to make the application more robust. We are removing code that uses the deprecated request parser from [Flask-RESTful](https://flask-restful.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reqparse.html) and are replacing it with [Marshmallow](https://marshmallow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/). After the refactoring is complete, all API request parsing will be handled by Marshmallow.
```

Author: Very nice!

> This application uses the [Flask](https://palletsprojects.com/p/flask/) micro-framework backed by an [sqlLite](https://sqlite.org/index.html) database ([Postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/) for production) utilizing [SQLAlchemy](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/14/) as the ORM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dwellingly is developed using the following tools and extensions:

- [Flask](https://palletsprojects.com/p/flask/) is used for the main web application framework
- [SQLite](https://sqlite.org/index.html) is used for database management ([Postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/) for production)
- [SQLAlchemy](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/14/) is used for object-relational mapping

Author: Much better! Thank you!

>  - [Flask-Restful](https://flask-restful.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is used for routing to encourage Restful routes/resources.
>  - [Marshmallow](https://marshmallow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) is being used for input validation, serialization, and deserialization.
>  - Flask-mail is currently being used to send mail, and Jinja is used for templating the email messages. However, the mail library has been deprecated and there is an open issue to switch to another library.
>  - [Flake8](https://gitlab.com/pycqa/flake8) is currently installed for linting, but probably not being used by many contributors. However, we will most likely be using [black](https://github.com/psf/black) in the future or a combination of Flake8 for linting and black for formatting.
>  - For database migrations, we recently installed [alembic](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/) and will be using that in the future. For now, while the app is under development, we drop the DB and rebuild whenever there is a change.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Flask-RESTful](https://flask-restful.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is used for routing to encourage RESTful routes and resources.
- [Marshmallow](https://marshmallow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) is used for input validation, serialization, and deserialization.
- Flask-mail is currently used to send mail and Jinja is used for templating the email messages. However, the mail library has been deprecated and there is an open issue to switch to another library.
- [Flake8](https://gitlab.com/pycqa/flake8) is currently installed for linting, but it is probably not being used by many contributors. However, we will most likely be using [Black](https://github.com/psf/black) in the future, or a combination of Flake8 for linting and Black for formatting.
- [Alembic](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/) was recently installed for database migrations. However, while the app is under development, we rebuild the database whenever there is a change.
```

>  - There are three different environments the application has been configured to run in: development, testing, and production.
>  - For testing, we are using [Pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/).
>  - It is an expectation that all new functionality, changes in behavior, or bug fixes will be covered under **automated tests**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

## Project Environments

The Dwellingly app is developed using the following environments:

- `development`
- `testing`
- `production`

## Testing

We use [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/) for automated testing.

All new functionality, changes in behavior, or bug fixes **must** be validated by pytest using test cases.
```

Author: I like this. Thank you!

> There are currently three main areas of the application to be familiar with, and possibly four in the future (dependent on how serialization will be handled).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

## Project Components
```

> The three main areas are resources, models, and schemas. This is in line with an MVC web application. The resources directory contains all of the controllers/endpoints. Resources is the terminology that Flask-restful uses and it is the terminology used here. Models are the models, that is where the database tables are defined, and methods that are related to fetching data from the database. The Schemas are for the Marshmallow library, and they define how to validate, serialize, and deserialize the data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The three main areas of the application to be familiar with are resources, models, and schemas. The models and resources align respectively with the model and controller components of a Model-View-Controller (MVC) web application. Schemas are used for input validation and deserialization.
```

Author: I like how concise your suggestion is. And it raises an issue that I hadn't thought of. When I read this paragraph I infer that a schema could be thought of the view in the MVC architecture, when in reality it is not. Since the backend is sending a JSON response and not rendering any views then we technically don't have the V in the MVC.

Perhaps it is better to say there are two main areas of the app (resources and models)?

Reviewer 3: Perhaps:

"The three main areas of the application to be familiar with are resources, models, and schemas. The models and resources align respectively with the model and controller components of a Model-View-Controller (MVC) web application. Schemas are used for input validation and deserialization."

I think it's better to stick with three because the schemas sections is below this introduction. People might wonder if it's really important if it's not listed as one of the major areas list at the top of the section.

Author: I like that!

> A fourth potential main area is the serializers folder which will be used to build the response.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A fourth potential main area is the `serializers` folder, which will be used to build the response.
```

There is one more file to be familiar with and that is the `app.py` file. This is the file that executes when the application starts. This is also where we are describing the routes for the app.

The rest of this section will describe the three main areas, and how each of those areas should be tested.

> Models:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Models
```

> Models define the database schema. They define what tables to create and what columns to use. They can also contain other methods that relate to the business logic of the application. All models in this application inherit from the BaseModel class, which adds created_at and updated_at timestamps for all the tables in the database. It also contains methods that are used to find, create, update, and delete database rows. As of this writing, some models still have an init method. However, for most of the models, the init method is not needed and will be removed. This is because Flask-restful provides an init method that works with keyword arguments, and it is recommended to call super if a custom init method is needed. You can see an example of this in the User Model. Currently, all models except for the lease model have a JSON method that defines how to serialize that object. Models can be found in the `models` directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Models define the database tables, the methods used to fetch data from the database, the tables to create, and what columns to use. They can also contain other methods that relate to the business logic of the application. All models in this application inherit from the BaseModel class, which adds `created_at` and `updated_at` timestamps for all the tables in the database. It also contains methods that are used to find, create, update, and delete database rows. As of this writing, some models still have an init method. However, for most of the models, the init method is not needed and will be removed. This is because Flask-RESTful provides an init method that works with keyword arguments, and it is recommended to call super if a custom init method is needed. You can see an example of this in the User Model. Currently, all models except for the lease model have a JSON method that defines how to serialize that object. Models can be found in the `models` directory.
```

> Testing Models:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Testing Models
```

> All models should have unit tests that can be found in the `tests/unit` directory. Each model should have tests that test the inherited methods from the BaseModel to ensure that nothing crazy is inadvertently done to change the behavior of the methods that the BaseModel provides. These are easily implemented using the base_interface_test file. Finally, there should be a test for every public method that is defined in the model. This would be the JSON method or any other method defined in the file that is directly used outside of the Models class.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All models should have unit tests that can be found in the `tests/unit` directory. Each model should have tests that test the inherited methods from the BaseModel to ensure that nothing crazy is inadvertently done to change the behavior of the methods that the BaseModel provides. These are easily implemented using the `base_interface_test` file. Finally, there should be a test for every public method that is defined in the model. This would be the JSON method or any other method defined in the file that is directly used outside of the Models class.
```

> Schemas:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Schemas
```

> Marshmallow Schemas are used primarily for input validation and deserialization. And eventually, we will probably use it for serialization too. Schemas receive the data that the client sends to the back-end, which validates that data before the data is inserted into the database, or used by other parts of the app. They can also describe how the data is serialized before sending data to the client. Schemas can be found in the `schemas` directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Marshmallow schemas are used primarily for input validation and deserialization. Eventually we will probably use it for serialization too. Schemas validate the data that is received by the client at the back end, before the data is inserted into the database or used by other parts of the app. They can also describe how the data is serialized before sending data to the client. Schemas can be found in the `schemas` directory.
```

> Testing Schemas:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Testing Schemas
```

> All schemas should have unit tests. Primarily validation tests. This app uses flask-marshmallow which provides an auto-schema that infers some basic validations based on the table definition in the Models class. Any additional validations defined in the schema must be tested. Schema tests can be found in the `tests/schemas` directory. Deserialization should also be tested here when used. Serialization is currently not used and does not need to be tested here at this time. Testing serialization may take place elsewhere.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All schemas should have unit tests, which primarily should be validation tests. This app uses Flask-Marshmallow, which provides an auto-schema that infers some basic validations based on the table definition in the Models class. Any additional validations defined in the schema must be tested. Schema tests can be found in the `tests/schemas` directory. Deserialization should also be tested here when used. Serialization is currently not used and does not need to be tested here at this time. Testing serialization may take place elsewhere.
```

> Resources:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Resources

Flask-RESTful uses the term "resources" in place of "controllers" in an MVC framework and that is also the term we use in this project.
```

> A resource's main job is to coordinate a response for the incoming request. If data is provided the resource will send that data to the schema for validation and deserialization. The resource will communicate with the model to query for data or insert/update a table row in the database. Finally, the resource will send a response back to the client. Resources can be found in the `resources` directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A resource's main job is to coordinate a response for the incoming request. If data is provided, the resource will send that data to the schema for validation and deserialization. The resource will communicate with the model to query for data or insert/update a table row in the database. Finally, the resource will send a response back to the client. Resources can be found in the `resources` directory.
```

> Testing Resources:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Testing Resources
```

> Each resource will usually have one test for each action (GET, POST, DELETE, etc...). When the Models and Schemas have unit tests, and when the resource uses the models and schemas appropriately, then **generally** only a successful response (The Happy Path) needs to be tested. All other responses that can occur happen elsewhere and are already under test. Such as validation errors, or a database row cannot be found. Errors such as these need not be tested as they're already built into the architecture of the app and happen automatically as long as the schemas are used along with the appropriate methods defined in the BaseModel. Tests for the resources can be found in the `tests/integration` directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each resource will usually have one test for each action (GET, POST, DELETE, etc...). When the Models and Schemas have unit tests, and when the resource uses the models and schemas appropriately, then **generally** only a successful response (The Happy Path) needs to be tested. All other responses that can occur are already tested elsewhere, including validation errors or database rows that cannot be found. Errors such as these should not be tested, as they're already built into the architecture of the app and happen automatically as long as the schemas are used along with the appropriate methods defined in the BaseModel. Tests for the resources can be found in the `tests/integration` directory.
```
